---
layout: post
title: Film as a Global and Cultural Form
categories: 21L011
---

# Lecture 5: Film as a Global and Cultural Form

## Film as a cultural form
- moviegoers often spent 4 hours at the theater
- theater tiers:
	- first run, second run, etc
	- ethnic theater: underground black film community
- Films are not benign objects – they can carry the viruses of society
- The word “entertainment” is much more complicated than it might seem.
It has a deeper and more powerful experience.
	- What does it mean to “entertain” an idea?  Entertainment puts us in an
	environment when we can entertain new ideas.
	- The space of entertainment is in many ways a freer and more
	psychological space than the ordinary space that we live in every day.
	- This idea is something that we’ll return to repeatedly in the course.  When
	we entertain an artistic space we enter a space of greater possibility.  We
	watch our fantasies, our cultural fears, and an investigation of our own
	value systems.
	- Film speaks to a certain greater consensus of culture: they reveal our own
	societal and psychic assumptions, values, and pathologies.

### Global vs. National Cinema
- part of the society and culture
- German films are very German, etc
- American westerns
	- spaghetti westerns are an interesting phenomenon
- films developed today often don't have a national identity
	- ex: action/adventure films speak across cultures
	- evacuates meaning from these films
- even in antiquity, took on tecniques, strategies, ideas, etc from other cultures
	- Russian films influenced by American films influenced by Russian films
	- Kurosawa deeply influenced by western art and culture
		- best works are often versions of Shakespeare
		- ex: *Throne of Blood*

### American vs. European Cinema
- Film industry in America developed very differently from Europe's
	- The US didn't have to deal with 2 major domestic wars
- Germany had an idea of art already
	- film industry developed right in the center of culture
	- directors and actors already established on the stage
	- movies were far less cinematic
- Europeans had a wonderfully rich idea of cinema as art
	- ambition and meaning was far more rich
- Americans saw it as a commodity
	- not bound by inherited notions of art
	- total freedom to define cinema as they will
- American entertainment vs. European art film
	- European cinema way more artistically conscious
-	American movie industry developed in the desert West, far away from traditional, elite cultural centers
- Class elements
	- new American culture: no time for a strict hierarchy to develop
	- definite egalitarian streak runs through the US
- films developed in a purely cultural manner
- weren't burdened by the idea of "high art"
	- recognized themselves as being purely a commodity
	- not really "oh, I'm working in the same medium as Molière"

### High culture vs. Hollywood
- Americans came to believe that movies were an escape, not actual art
- cultural space occupied by the movies were outside of the artistic hierarchies in American society

## Film today
- currently in a moment of medium exploration
	- tiny screens, 3D delivery
	- James Cameron's *Avatar*: technical impressiveness, shitty story
	- various screen sizes: responsive design for movies?
- crazy destabilization of technology
	- basic economic structures disrupted: no longer need to hit up a theater
	- 3D animation and visual effects
- profoundly in transition and flux

### Museumization
- 1970s: American films start to be recognized as powerful artistic transition
	- recognized just as they are no longer the central form of narrative in society
- elaborate scholarship arises to study a medium as it starts phasing out

## Montage vs. Mise en Scène
- both terms put into use by French critic André Bazin
- montage: from French montier
	- "to put together"
	- the way the film is stitched together
	- fundamental editing tools
	- quick editing vs. long, deliberate shots
- mise en scène
	- "put in scene"
	- the individual components of an individual scene/shot
	- people, movement, foreground, background
- distinction between "montage director" and "mise en scène dirctors"
	- montage focuses on emotions, mise en scène focuses on reality
	- ex: Eisensein was mise en scène, Hitchcock was montage

## Eisenstein and *Potemkin* (1925)
- Film as instruction, propaganda, moral fable